## 44.4 Type of Events and Event Handlers

An event is nothing but the signal generated by any DOM element when user perform some action over it. Like click of a button, hover over a button, mouse press on screen, etc.. We can listen to these events in javascript using event listeners and perform some action based on these events. We have already worked with the 'click' event and added eventListeners to the buttons. In below code we will work with a different event called 'mouseenter' which is similar to that of hover, which means as soon as mouse pointer enters the element this event will trigger. Have a look at below code.

```javascript
const h1Element = document.querySelector("h1");

h1Element.addEventListener("mouseenter", function (e) {
  alert("Your mouse entered the heading section..!!");
});
```

If you add above code then as soon as your mouse enters the h1 portion of your webpage the alert message will trigger and this will happen every time the mouse enter event occur on h1 element.

This above one is the modern way to handle the events but in some old code you might find event handling in below fashion.

```javascript
const h1Element = document.querySelector("h1");

h1Element.onmouseenter = function (e) {
  alert(
    "Old style event handling - Your mouse entered the heading section..!!"
  );
};
```

In above code we have directly assigned the handler function to the onmouseenter property of the h1Element. This will also works the same way. By using modern way we can remove the eventListener from the element after the event occur once. To implement this we have to define the handler function separately like below.

```javascript
const h1Element = document.querySelector("h1");

const h1Handler = function () {
  alert("Your mouse entered the heading section..!!");
  h1Element.removeEventListener("mouseenter", h1Handler);
};

h1Element.addEventListener("mouseenter", h1Handler);
```

In above example we have declared the handler function first because while removind the eventListner we need to pass the handler function to be removed as well. In the handler function after the execution of all steps we are writing `h1Element.removeEventListener("mouseenter", h1Handler);` which means remove the event listner from h1Element which is listening to the mouseenter event and calling the handler function h1Handler. So for the first time the eventListner will listen to the event and call the handler function but after that the eventListner will be removed from the h1Element. (We can remove the eventListner based on some condition, after specific time interval using setTimeout(), after certain number of event happens, etc..)
